Ordinary Ontologies : strategies for standardising metaverse processes, systems and technologies


Dr Jessica Symons, Director, Visioning Lab &
Dr John O’Hare, University of Salford

Paper for XRM2024, Busan, South Korea


Dr Jessica Symons
Introducing.. 
Anthropologist and digital consultant specialising in R&D on emerging concepts and technologies


How could defining metaverse environments more clearly tackle barriers to adoption ?

The battle for market dominance through trademarking platforms is getting in the way of increased user adoption
What’s in a name?

Different sectors use different terms for the same thing eg one person’s drone is another person’s UAV*
*Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
Synchronising terms enables understanding
The ‘internet’, ‘websites’, ‘hyperlinks’, ‘smartcards’, ‘mobiles’ - these terms now define a new way of being in the world
Standards need adoption to work

Cityscape Digital
Meet the Network
National Manufacturing Institute Scotland
Designing Buildings
Engineering 
Multinationals e.g.
Atkins Realis 
Mott Macdonald

Architects &
Masterplanners

Metaverse specialists
e.g. Bloktopia

AI specialists
e.g. Digica

Local Councils
City Regions e.g.
Manchester
Liverpool

Government orgs
e.g. Connected Places, Digital Catapult, Environment Agency








Semantic Partners

Metaverse ontology development activity
1) identifying metaverse-related sectors (eg AR/VR, digital twin, IoT, gaming, robotics), 
2) assessing existing initiatives and standards (eg IEEE P2874, UK National Cyber-Physical Infrastructure) 
3) consulting with metaverse organisations through conferences, surveys, 1-2-1/1-2-many discussions and workshops 
4) using AI tools to autogenerate metaverse ontologies based on different criteria, 
5) sharing metaverse ontology with the network for feedback 
6) feeding results into Metaverse Standards definition processes 
7) developing related knowledge graphs 
8) considering business models to fund/support ongoing development 

Research influences
Abu-Salih, Bilal. (2022) "MetaOntology: Toward developing an ontology for the metaverse." Frontiers in Big Data 5 : 998648.
Abu-Salih presents the beginnings of a metaverse ontology


DeLanda, M. (2019). A new philosophy of society.
Delanda presents assemblages as nested inside each other from atoms to people and cars to cities and countries to the world itself. 

Each assemblage has its own purpose and properties.


Industry 
influences



“We believe the metaverse will be the successor of the mobile internet”  

“We’ll be able to feel present – like we’re right there with people no matter how far apart we actually are.”

Mark Zuckerberg 



Third sector
influences




Working groups focused on:
Interoperability
Definitions
Object, avatar and platform integration

Practitioner experience 
John
Visioning Lab : research and projects
Producing AR/VR experiences + 3D virtual environments using Mozilla Hubs
Developing digital twin visualisation strategy for engineering company
Developing disaster/flooding data in 3D game environments
Building AR app and platform in Unity (PopupView)
Working with artists, musicians and producers to design AR experiences for platform
Sharing AR and VR with general public at multiple events
Geospatial soundwalks

What is, and why create, a Metaverse ontology?
Each sector (e.g. built environment, law, medicine, dating) uses a specific set of words / meanings and defines the relationships between them
While companies and organisations in each sector use common terms, they structure and store their data differently
This makes integration of datasets challenging

Ontologies provide a semantic structure allowing for managed integration of multiple-datasets into data-driven systems
How to define people is challenging and sensitive in the relationship sector

Ontology background
Established to facilitate integration, supported by W3, global standards group

Case Study: BioPortal
World-leading ontology platform
Stanford = academic led
1092 ontologies
100k monthly visits

Case Study: Semantic Partners / Ontotext
Private sector, bespoke ontologies for clients
Proprietary, IP protected

Hot Sectors
Existing sectors using ontologies extensively
Crop and pest management, soil/ecosystem health, precise management of stocks and planting, species identification, regulation compliance
Agriculture and fishing
Resource classification, environmental impact assessment, safety and risk management
Oil & Gas / mining

Disease classification / diagnosis, pharmacology / drug discovery, genomics / personalised medicine, research, data interoperability
Biomedical
Regulatory compliance, risk management, product/service innovation, fraud detection, customer management
Financial sector

‘Warm’ Sectors
Complex competitive eco-systems with inter-dependent processes that would benefit from ontologies
Precise mission critical infrastructure, BIM, rapidly changing demands with sustainability pressures, keen interest in AI
Built environment (inc heritage) 
Emerging, ill-defined terminology, opportunity to shape with using built environment / cyber-physical government aspirations

Metaverse industry

Highly competitive, dating / relationship apps dependent on language / categorical search activity and sensitivity to terminology

Relationship management
Highly specific terminology, rapid adoption of emerging technologies especially AI
Legal sector


The metaverse is already imagined

2.7 billion* gamers worldwide are already there 
(*Statistica 2022)

The metaverse = immersive storyworlds
The metaverse = interconnected audiovisual stable 3D environments accessible through digital technology

3D films
The metaverse : Connecting 3D virtual environments 
Grand Theft Auto
(195m)
Roblox
(905m)
Architecture models
Fortnite
(350m)
Flight simulators
Digital twin
AutoDesk
(100m)
Car driving systems
Manufacturing
Space/ Oil & Gas - dangerous environments
VR experiences
Internet of Things
PC / Console 3D games
Mobile games and experiences
Built environment modelling
Virtual reality environments (VR)
Simulators
Automation  Sensors
Robotics 
Combined physical/virtual environments (AR)
Meta Quest (20m) / Apple Vision (200k) spaces
Immersive experiences
PopupView
UoM Collabatorium
Kokoro
Flood Games Initiative
Atmosphere
Geothicket
Visioning Lab Projects
Soundwalks
Drone systems
VR Chat
(8m)
First Choice Homes consultation
PUBG
(80m)
Rocket League
Virtual production
Despicable Me / Angry Birds / Frozen 2
Readyverse
Minecraft
(300m)
Pokemon Go
(630m)

Example: Gaming environments

Example: Virtual Reality Environments
Abstract 3D geometries as a VR experience
=
Immersed in a mathematical realm

VR experience by Professor Keith Brown

Example: Augmented Reality / physical world
Augmented Reality app to show how the past used to be
= 
Eg: Immersed in the past
BBC at Roman Baths

Eg: PopupView’s 
Birdsong


3D Projection
Projection onto natural landscapes
=
Immersed in a fantastical nature world
https://mymodernmet.com/teamlab-kairakuen-garden/ 

Example: Digital twin cities
The digital data and software that constitutes a city
=
Building the city
Servicing the city
Managing the city
Living in the city
Source: Visioning Lab

Example: Architect 3D modelling tools
Each component of a city is modelled first using 3D software such as AutoCAD
http://www.wedrawfast.com/blog/tag/3d-architects/ 

Example: Drones and Robots 
Drones, robots, self-driving cars all need software with awareness of 3D environments
https://www.packworld.com/trends/operational-excellence/blog/13373374/weighing-the-impact-of-selfdriving-vehicles-on-logistics 

Example: Simulation & Manufacturing environments
Flight, space, underwater simulation environments are now part of a wider virtual environment network.

Planning manufacturing in a Virtual Factory is an extension to this.
https://resources.imaginit.com/manufacturing-solutions-blog/using-twinmotion-to-visualize-your-factory-layout 

Technologies for accessing the Metaverse
Now
PCs
Phones
Headsets
Glasses

Future
Contact lenses
Neural networks

Visualise through projection

The metaverse : 3D software for virtual environments
Unreal
CryEngine
3DS (Dassault Systems)
Unity
Flight simulator
Cyber-Physical Infrastructure
AutoDesk
(100m)
Car driving systems
Virtalis
NVIDIA Omniverse
PC / Console 3D games
Mobile games and experiences
Built environment modelling tools
Virtual reality environments (AR)
Simulators
Automation
ARGoS Sim
Combined physical/virtual environments (AR)
Data Integration
Drone systems
Frostbite
Godot
Blockchain
Open data
AI
Viverse
Siemens
Gazebo open source sim
CoppelliaSim
FrameVR
Virbela

BUT technologies are just the tools
The first step is the conceptualisation of an immersive environment to be accessed by different technologies

So the question is HOW TO CONCEPTUALISE THE METAVERSE?

This requires imagination (with a little help from AI)…


Defining metaverse ontology using AI
Each of these 3D virtual environments use different terms and define the relationships between them differently
ChatGPT helps bring them together 


AI Metaverse ontologies ‘inspired by’...
Inspired by metaverse academic paper
ChatGPT defined 5/3/24
Inspired by love poetry
Abu-Salih, Bilal. "MetaOntology: Toward developing an ontology for the metaverse." Frontiers in Big Data 5 (2022): 998648.
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fdata.2022.998648/full 

Incorporation of digital asset tracking through blockchain

AI Feminist metaverse ontology
Note emphasis on fairness and inclusivity
ChatGPT defined 2/4/24

Insight from AI-led Metaverse ontology design
Technological definitions only take you so far
Metaverse ontologies should start with:
Mood
Tone
Inclusivity
Safeguarding
How does this environment make the user feel?
E.g. Avatar options need to be sensitive to people’s identity…
https://avatar.viverse.com/avatar/creator 

Co-producing metaverse ontologies with partners
Presented draft ontology to network - feedback loop
Classes: 
Object + Avatar + Scene 
Scaffold + Narrative + Purpose
Audio_sound + Visual_view
Agents (eg AIs) + Identifiers
Economy + Marketplace
Attributes
Persistence
Dimensions
Movement
Appearance
Governance
Interface
State
Logic (belief,desire,intention)
Speech + Language

Mycelium of the Metaverse - fusing the two
Dr John J O’Hare
Spatial AI Consultant and Product Engineer specialising in proof of concept and prototype design
Multi-generative AI tools from 500 page research corpus on immersive technologies produces metaverse ontology 
Knowledge Graph produced using Gemini 1.5, Claude and Chat GPT 4 via OWL
http://owlgred.lumii.lv/online_visualization/4qge 

Towards auto-generated metaverse instances
As AI comes to autogenerate metaverse environments, the instruction/guidance needs to be very clear
Ontologies provide the connection
We need to be confident that the guardrails are in place

Next steps : towards an agentic nanny AI
Governance and safeguarding
How do we reconcile the social and technical as we move towards hyper-technical environments?
How to we guide development of Metaverse solutions designed outside context of laws and countries?
Where is the right place to provide this guidance from?
How can ontologies support this process?
Avatars
How to guide development of avatar visualisation, representation and behaviour?
How can existing social conventions (such as feminism) support this process?
Spaces
How to create environments where people can express themselves freely whilst also not upsetting others?
Looking for partners / funders!








To find out more

Contact:
Jessica Symons
Visioning Lab
jessica@visioninglab.com 
07984747796

John O’Hare
University of Salford
J.OHare5@salford.ac.uk 
